---
title: 1.2. LI Today and Its Challenges
permalink: /docs/1.2/
---

***

While LI and its various formulations  have traditionally been applied holistically to morphology and syntax, it has long been understood that LI subsumes two separable points, first noted by Postal (1969): (i) some linguistic phenomena covered by LI involve the relationship between syntax and the lexicon (e.g., situations of apparent non-local dependencies, in which the syntax may access the semantic, sublexical components of words), while others refer to (ii) the relationship between morphology and syntax (e.g., situations in which morphological processes affect phrasal syntax, or syntactic procedures affect word formation). Beginning in the 2000s, these two observations led some to question whether these constraints on the relationship between syntax and the lexicon, and between syntax and morphology, are equally strong. Booij (2005, 2009) distinguishes two kinds of LI violations : ‘accessibility’ violations (syntactic and semantic access of word-internal structure), and ‘manipulation’ violations (syntactic manipulation of word-internal structure). Booij claims that LI should allow for accessibility of word-internal structure to syntax and semantics, while disallowing manipulation, and suggests a revised version of LI:  
<br/>
##### (Revised) Lexical Integrity  
*“[…] syntax may need access to the internal structure of words […]. Hence the part of [LI] that forbids syntax to have access to word-internal structure appears to be incorrect.”* (Booij 2005:14)  
<br/>
Lieber and Scalise (2007:20-21) identify only what they consider to be “the strongest challenges to [LI]”, which they broadly categorize in terms of their type of inter-component interaction – (a) morphology has access to syntax, (b) syntax has access to morphology, (c) morphology/semantics interactions, and (d) morphology/phonology interactions  – and argue for the following restatement of LI, which acts in tandem with an added formal morphological operation  to restrict (on a language-specific basis) the type and degree of morphosyntactic interaction.  
<br/>
##### Restatement of Lexical Integrity  
*“Syntax and morphology are normally blind to each other. However, limited intermodular access may be allowed by virtue of allowing [specific linguistic configurations].”* (Lieber and Scalise 2007:21)  
<br/>
In line with Booij (2005, 2009) and Lieber and Scalise (2007), Bruening (2018) notes that LI disallows at least two separable types of linguistic phenomena: (1) cases where phrasal syntax can feed word formation (what he refers to as “Error 1” (pp. 2)), and (2) syntactic access of word-internal parts (referred to as “Error 2” (pp. 13)). Bruening shows that situations in which phrasal syntax feeds word formation conflict with a LI view that word formation and phrasal syntax are distinct, linear components since word formation can take fully formed syntactic phrases as input. For example, English permits phrasal derivations as below in Example 4 (from Lieber and Scalise 2007:9), where the suffix -ish attaches to the fully-formed phrases (indicated in square brackets) self-sufficient and Don’s Long-Awaited Photo Tutorial, respectively.  
<br/>
##### Example 4  
a.	[self-sufficient]-ish  
b.	[Don’s Long-Awaited Photo Tutorial]-ish Thing  
<br/>
Additionally, situations where syntax accesses word-internal elements conflict with LI, since word-internal structure is held to be opaque to syntactic operations. A transparent example of syntactic access of sublexical parts is found among so-called anaphoric islands (Postal 1969), in which a pronoun may be co-referential with a word-internal element elsewhere in the sentence. In Example 5 below, the pronouns him and he refer to the word-internal unit Reagan, located inside the derived word form Reagan-ite. Since coreference is traditionally understood as a syntactic relation (a binding relationship between NPs in a licit structural configuration), the cases in Example 5 would appear to be ones in which phrase-level grammar has access to word-internal parts.  
<br/>
##### Example 5  
a.	Reagan<sub>i</sub>ites no longer believe in him<sub>i</sub>  
b.	he<sub>i</sub> no longer believes in Reagan<sub>i</sub>ites  
<br/>
However, Bruening (pp. 15-23) goes further by providing a third error type (“Error 3”), arguing LI incorrectly predicts that morphology and syntax are truly separate components and obey different sets of principles; specifically, examples that are claimed to adhere to LI (e.g. extraction, coordination, and ellipsis) are shown to follow from LI-independent principles, such as the distinction between heads and phrases. Bruening demonstrates that certain processes are only able to affect phrases (namely extraction, coordination, and specific types of ellipsis), while other processes that can be taken as violating LI affect only heads (e.g. ellipsis in certain coordinate structures, such as word-part ellipsis  in half-brothers and (half)-sisters). Bruening therefore concludes that the predictions LI makes are both incorrect, since syntax has been shown to feed word formation and word-internal units can in fact be accessed by syntax, and do no explanatory work, since linguistic phenomena that appear to follow from LI can be accounted for through independent principles. In other words, no separable morphological component appears necessarily useful or essential to linguistic theory and explanation, leading Bruening to suggest a theory in which a single syntactic component is responsible for both words and phrases .  
<br/>
While it is clear that LI in its various incarnations is a significant underlying assumption in contemporary linguistic theory, the explanatory power and tenability of LI is poorly understood. Some claim it is essential, with morphology and syntax treated as distinct modules (e.g. Bresnan and Mchombo 1995, among others); some have claimed that, in light of the distinct linguistic phenomena that it covers, the principle must be maintained in certain cases and abandoned in other situations (e.g., Booij 2005, 2009; Lieber and Scalise 2007); and others argue that LI is unnecessary even when distinct classes of violations are recognized (e.g. Bruening 2018). Consequently, the relevance of LI to linguistic theory is nebulous, particularly since it is often simply not clear what linguistic phenomena LI is supposed to disallow, what constitutes a violation of LI, and why. For example, LI violations may manifest at the border of word formation and phrasal combination (e.g. the English phrasal derivations in Example 4 above), or as issues of interpretation rather than form, as in the case of anaphoric islands outlined above in Example 5. LI violations have also been observed in major morphosyntactic patterns, as in the positioning of person markers (also referred to as endoclitics) in Udi (Harris 2002). Udi person markers can occur as a suffix between other bound morphemes on a verb, as for example the third person singular marker -ne in Example 6a, but also morpheme-internally as in Example 6b, in which -ne- appears within the verb root ef ‘keep’. However, person markers also appear on words external to the verb, such as Example 6c where -ne is attached to the noun ait ‘word’, which functions syntactically as the direct object.  
<br/>
##### Example 6  
a. aš-ne-b-sa  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;work-3.SG-LV-PRES  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;‘she works’  
b. ei-ne-fi-sa  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;keepi-3.SG-keepi-PRES  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;‘she keeps (it)’  
c. merab-en ayt-ne ef-sa  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Merab-ERG word.ABS-3.SG keep-PRES  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;‘Merab keeps his word’  
<br/>
Therefore, the placement of Udi person markers must be at least partially syntactic, since they can occur at the edge of an apparent VP, in much the same way that a clitic might (e.g. the ’s genitive ‘suffix’ in English, which can occur at the right edge of NPs, as in NP[the person on the street]’s opinion). It is then unclear what the proper analysis of an inflectional marker that sometimes behaves like an inflectional suffix and infix, and sometimes like a syntactic constituent, should look like, and whether it is in fact a violation of LI. Presenting a somewhat similar problem as the Udi data above, examples of coordination and ellipsis of word-parts, such as Example 7 below, can be analyzed in terms of a syntactic process whereby entire phrases are conjoined, followed by the deletion of word-parts (Chaves 2008) – in this case, a second pro in pro-choice and (pro)-gun control. If viewed from a strictly morphological viewpoint, the ellipsis of word-parts would constitute a syntactic manipulation violation of word structure.  
<br/>
##### Example 7  
pro-choice and gun control  
<br/>
Conversely, the same phenomena can be viewed in terms of suspended affixation (Spencer 2005:83), where a single affix (pro- in the example above) has scope over two or more conjoined words (choice and gun), constituting an apparent morphological process and syntactic access violation at the phrase-level. Considerations such as the genesis and development of LI, its various (weak and strong) formulations, recent challenges and reformulations, and apparent violations, suggest that LI is a good lens through which to view the goals of linguistic theory and explanation in general, and the nature and efficacy of the syntax-morphology distinction specifically.  

***

## Section 1.2 Footnotes  
<br/>
<a name="fn1">1</a>: Aronoff (1976:5-6) observes earlier work in generative phonology likewise led to a reintroduction of morphology; specifically, Chomsky and Halle’s (1968) attempts to constrain the power of phonological theory revealed that various phenomena (e.g. rules of inflectional morphology) were beyond a formal phonological theory (i.e. part of morphology).  
<br/>
<a name="fn2">2</a>: The other two points Chomsky (1970:188-189) discusses include: (i) the productivity of the transformational process that produces gerundive nominals, as opposed to the apparent restrictions on the formation of derived nominals, and (ii) the generality of the relation between each nominal and the associated proposition; namely that derived nominals tend to be semantically idiosyncratic, as compared to the semantics of gerundives.  
<br/>
<a name="fn3">3</a>: Spencer (1991:72-73) further elaborates on Jackendoff’s (1972) Extended Lexicalist Hypothesis, noting “the content of [the Extended Lexicalist Hypothesis] is that transformations should only be permitted to operate on syntactic constituents and to insert or delete named entities (like propositions). This means that they can't be used to insert, delete, permute or substitute parts of words [which] in turn means that they can't be used in derivational morphology.”  
<br/>
<a name="fn4">4</a>: These similarities include the pre-theoretical observation that both involve the combination of linguistic elements into meaningful constituents (words from morphemes, and phrases, clauses and sentences from words). Other similarities are theory-specific, such as the notion that words exhibit hierarchical structures containing heads and their projections (Williams 1981), subcategorization (Lieber 1980), recursion (Josefsson 1998) and incorporation and government (Baker 1985a, b) – all concepts traditionally employed in syntactic description.  
<br/>
<a name="fn5">5</a>: The lexicalist spectrum is evidently related to the Split Morphology Hypothesis (SMH) (Anderson 1982), and therefore each approach to morphology/syntax on the lexicalist spectrum will vary depending on the linguist’s explicit or implicit assumptions regarding the SMH.  
<br/>
<a name="fn6">6</a>: It should be noted that the weak lexicalism of Aronoff (1976) and Anderson (1982) differ with respect to whether inflection is a syntactic operation (in the case of the former), and whether inflection is a phonological operation (in the case of the latter) (Scalise 1986:102).  
<br/>
<a name="fn7">7</a>: Bruening (2018:2) notes an additional meaning to the term lexicalism, which involves theories with enriched lexical entries that perform important functions in the grammar. An example of such a lexicalist theory is Combinatory Categorial Grammar (CCG) (Steedman 2000)).
